hello my name is Jake freestone I'm the
farm manager at ovary farms and we
relief demonstration farm leaf being
linking environment and farming today
I'm going to tell you a little bit about
how we manage our water here at overview
this guidebook on simply sustainable
water has been developed by leaf in
conjunction with Asda and the Molson
Coors Brewing Company the booklet is
divided up into six simple steps the
first one being water saving so let's
have a look at how we save water at over
here we are at park farm where we've
rested in some rainwater harvesting
technology in 2011 we invested in an
extra bay extension into the lambing
sheds here at over break and part of
that investment was a rainwater
harvesting technology so we invested in
two ten thousand litre harvesting tanks
which are fed from the valley gutter
when they fill up any overflow comes out
and goes into a soak away this water is
used to water sheep when they're being
housed in the sheds here or when they're
in individual pens or groups of pens out
in the farmyard water is used from the
tank through the outlet at the bottom
here at the moment it's frost protected
we're in the middle of the winter we're
expecting some cold weather coming
forward and that's quite an important
point to mention as water-saving trying
to reduce the risk of burst pipes that
can then leak a lot of water in a very
short space of time step two is about
protecting your water sources and we
have an integrated farming approach that
covers that subject integrated farm
management what's it all about well here
is a classic example of how we've put
that into practice behind me we have a
stream which is spring fed from the hill
and we use some integrated techniques to
help preserve the water quality the
first one is what I'm standing on we've
got a grass tsuki margin which acts to
intercept pesticides and fertilizer from
the arable field to my left the other
side of the hedge we've actually got a
pollen or nectar high-level stewardship
margin which again can help provide
insect feed and cover for birds as well
as intercepting and protecting the water
running down through this bit of a
valley soil is a key aspect of water
management
step three is all about soil management
for water quality here we have a cover
crop of mustard which benefits water
quality in two ways
firstly it locks up nutrients within the
field so they can't be washed away
particularly in periods of heavy
rainfall the second benefit is that it
stops soil erosion down the slope so if
you can leave stubble or plant a catch
cover crop like this you're intercepting
the rainfall reducing soil erosion and
potential silting and taking nutrients
and pesticides down into the water
course so where you have an opportunity
for spring cropping it might be
something to consider with all the wet
weather we've been having land drainage
something that we're paying particular
attention to step four is drainage and I
would also include ditching in that as
well here is a good example of a silt
trap that we've created along one of the
many field ditches we have on the farm
its purpose was to widen and deepen the
ditch to slow the water down with the
water moving at a slower pace any soil
particles held within the water can sink
to the bottom taking any pesticide or
fertilizer attached to them with them
these silt traps can then be muddied out
periodically and returned back to the
field so as the water exits the silt
trap it returns to the natural ditch
line previously here then it gets to the
next bit which is equally as important
and this is a reed bed now we've started
digging this in March 2011 when there
was no water flow through this ditch 12
months ago we excavated over 150 tons of
soil from these two areas of the farm we
instated the reed beds and as you can
see the reeds have still to get to full
size and maturity in time the reeds will
develop to cover this whole area they'll
then provide habitat for birds like Reed
buntings and also great insect habitat
so as the water passes through the reed
beds it's being cleaned the reeds are
taking any fertilizer and nutrients out
of the water the water then returns to
the existing ditch and heads off down to
the local brook the theory says that
this water should have a higher quality
but it's very important for us as land
managers to monitor that step 5
is tracking water use or monitoring this
is a very important management tool
primarily to work out if you're losing
water from your system which can indeed
cost you a lot of money over a very
short period of time whenever we're
doing more water repairs on the farm day
we'll try and put meters in so we can
accurately monitor any lost between
sections within the farm supply the
other area of monitoring which we do a
lot of it's the quality of water so we
have nitrate and phosphate kits that we
can analyze water as it leaves the farm
and actually has arrives on the farm to
work out what impact our farming systems
are having on that water quality step
six is water availability and sunshine
hours there's nothing you can do about
how the rainfall falls on your farm but
it's very important to be aware of the
impact that it can have on your soil and
water quality the other angle is
sunshine hours we're looking at
investing in a weather station to record
sunshine and rainfall and aspects of the
weather this is very very important when
you look at the whole integrated farming
approach so that we have a record of how
our crops performed under certain
weather circumstances from this we can
use that information in subsequent years
to potentially manage our crops to a
better degree so we as farmers and land
managers are having increasing
challenges with the yo-yo effect of
drought and a period of heavy rainfall
this guide simply sustainable water
gives some very clear tips as to the
first stages that you might want to take
on on your farms to try and manage water
more effectively be a better
environmental asset and the quality of
that water can also improve this guide
is available to download from WWF UK org
if you want to know more about how we're
continuing it over brief arms do follow
my blog or follow on Twitter at
number-one farmer Jake
you